Progress Report February 2023 (#344)
yuzu-emu/yuzu-emu.github.io: site/content/entry/yuzu-progress-report-feb-2023/index.md

## Hardware section

### NVIDIA driver 531.18, it’s a good one

This latest (at the time of writing) release of the NVIDIA driver, 531.18, includes support for `VK_EXT_extended_dynamic_state3`, a Vulkan extension previous readers will be familiar with.
Having this extension supported means fewer shaders need to be built, resulting in a smoother experience thanks to reduced shader stuttering, and lower RAM use.

We recommend at least Turing and newer (GTX 1600, RTX 2000-4000) users to update, as we expect this release to not fix the issues affecting Pascal and Maxwell hardware (GTX 1000 and older).

### AMD Ryzen 7000X3D series, and the importance of Game Mode

AMD recently released their Zen 4 CPUs with 3D V-Cache technology, and in an effort to copy Intel in weirdness, they decided to release a top of the line asymmetric design with the 7950X3D.

Only one of this gaming-beast CPU’s two CCDs (modules containing 8 cores each) has access to the expanded L3 V-Cache, and the decision on which one to use is up to Windows Game Bar. 
To our dismay, there is no hardware scheduler here. 
The chipset driver and a Windows toggle decides which mode is better.

> Since yuzu and basically any other emulator are not registered as games by Windows, the user will have to manually intervene and enable `Game Mode` in order to let the chipset driver profile performance and decide which CCD will provide the best performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since yuzu, and basically any other emulator, are not registered as games by Windows, the user will have to manually intervene and enable `Game Mode` in order to let the chipset driver profile performance and decide which CCD will perform the best.
```

Keeping the pursuit for accuracy, byte[] also implemented {{< gh-hovercard "9832" "HLE multiprocess" >}} for services.
Now instead of pushing the game’s requests to the services, the services wait for the requests to arrive.
All this processing is done, for the most part, in what would be the emulated `core 3` of the Switch, instead of all over the place with one thread per service. 
Games usually only have access to cores 0 to 2, so we're now dedicating the last core for system service processing, just as the actual Switch operating system does!

This part of CPU emulation is one of the main reasons we recommend at least 6 cores in our [hardware requirements](https://yuzu-emu.org/help/quickstart/#hardware-requirements), 4 for uninterrupted emulation of the Switch’s CPU, and extras for other processes and tasks. Just a 4 core CPU will be usually overburdened. HT/SMT may help, but that will always depend on the workload at any given moment.
A SMT/HT thread can’t improve performance in a significant way if the core is already saturated.

Boss [bunnei](https://github.com/bunnei) chimed in too, fixing a mistake in {{< gh-hovercard "9773" "memory mapping." >}}

> We erroneously used the (bear with me, it’s not a redundancy) system’s system resource tracking, instead of relying on the application’s one when loading programs into memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We erroneously used the (bear with me, it’s not a redundancy) system’s system resource tracking, instead of relying on the application’s resource tracking when loading programs into memory.
```

{{< imgs
	"./ps.png| Mandatory protagonist seat (Pokémon Scarlet)"
  >}}

Some code changes later, and german77 fixed the issue! Now anyone can enjoy the reduced NPC count and lower draw distance.

Even [your writer](https://github.com/goldenx86) tried to give a hand (emphasis on tried).
[As reported in the past](https://yuzu-emu.org/entry/yuzu-progress-report-dec-2022/#cpu-requirement-changes-with-free-performance), we applied `Link-time Optimization` to all of yuzu’s subprojects. This meant that every section like audio, input, UI, etc. used LTO at build time, trying to squeeze out every possible bit of performance.
This caused an unexpected problem: RAM consumption while building increased enough to cause our buildbot to cry for help, causing builds on our Azure DevOps CI to randomly run out of memory.

byte[] suggested that I instead profile which subprojects would provide the most performance boosts, and to only apply LTO to those.
A few rounds of toasting a CPU by building yuzu later, and it was determined that the two most obvious candidates, core and video_core, were the responsible ones for the performance boost provided by enabling LTO.

> {{< gh-hovercard "9872" "Partially applying LTO" >}} to only the core and video_core projects not only reduced compiler RAM use, but also provided a very minor but still consistently measured performance increase, `The Legend of Zelda: Link’s Awakening` improved from 257 FPS to 260 FPS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< gh-hovercard "9872" "Partially applying LTO" >}} to only the core and video_core projects not only reduced compiler RAM use, but also provided a very minor but still consistently measured performance increase. For example, `The Legend of Zelda: Link’s Awakening` increased from 257 FPS to 260 FPS.
```

I’m a disaster, sorry.

## Input improvements

`Metroid Prime Remastered` introduced a serious dilemma: People want to play the game as an FPS with mouse and keyboard.

{{< single-title-imgs
    "This game is gorgeous, like Samus (Metroid Prime Remastered)"
    "./mpr.png"
    "./mpr2.png"
    >}}

The problem is that the game uses motion on top of stick input to aim, making it an interesting case for how to handle non-controller input.

This was incentive enough to get german77 interested in giving it a try:

- First off, he fixed an issue where {{< gh-hovercard "9757" "motion would be constantly getting recalibrated." >}}
- Next, german77 tweaked the {{< gh-hovercard "9815" "mouse scaling" >}} for users running a DPI scaling higher than 100% (1.0x).
- Following up, the {{< gh-hovercard "9842" "mapping for mouse input" >}} was improved. By default a mouse to stick is considered a joystick, which includes assuming deadzone and ranges that aren’t zero by default. This pull request includes some other miscellaneous changes, like fixing some UI elements not working.

> - And finally, to address Metroid Prime Remastered’s `hybrid mode`, support for {{< gh-hovercard "9848" "dedicated motion using the mouse" >}} was added. Since the game only uses two axes, this can be directly mapped 1:1 to mouse movement, giving great ease of aiming!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- And finally, to address `Metroid Prime Remastered`’s "hybrid mode", support for {{< gh-hovercard "9848" "dedicated motion using the mouse" >}} was added. Since the game only uses two axes, this can be directly mapped 1:1 to mouse movement, making aiming a breeze!
```

The user can adjust the sensitivity of mouse motion with the same setting used for mouse panning in `Emulation > Configure… > Controls > Advanced`

{{< imgs
	"./mouse.png| Remember to set sensitivity to your liking"
  >}}

But did german77 focus on nothing but Metroid Prime Remastered? No.
Continuing the work started in [December of 2022](https://yuzu-emu.org/entry/yuzu-progress-report-dec-2022/#new-joy-con-driver-and-other-input-improvements), {{< gh-hovercard "9759" "support for Pro Controllers" >}} within the new custom “Joy-Con” driver.
Since the option is experimental, it only works properly on official Switch Pro Controllers and not with third party controllers, so it’s disabled by default.

> Owners of *real* Pro Controllers are encouraged to enable this option, as it will provide much better motion and HD Rumble support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Owners of *real* Pro Controllers are encouraged to enable this option, as it will provide much improved motion and HD Rumble support.
```

{{< imgs
	"./procon.png| Not the same screenshot as the previous one, I swear"
  >}}

> Previous limitations like being unable to use a Pro Controller for Amiibo detection are still in place, as there’s still work to be done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previous limitations, like being unable to use a Pro Controller for Amiibo detection, still exist as there’s still work to be done.
```

## Audio improvements

There are some interesting changes in audio emulation that many users will be happy about, let’s go one by one.

A crash was fixed by german77 when {{< gh-hovercard "9758" "initializing" >}} [cubeb](https://github.com/mozilla/cubeb), our default audio library.
Guess having fewer crashes is always good, right?

Merry made an attempt at fixing a {{< gh-hovercard "9768" "rounding issue" >}} in the bi-quad filter. 

> While the intention of this change is to partially improve the audio quality in several games, most notably Metroid Prime Remastered (the game of the month), it didn’t quite hit the mark.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the intention of this change is to partially improve the audio quality in several games, most notably `Metroid Prime Remastered` (the game of the month), it didn’t quite hit the mark.
```

> This wasn’t enough to solve the random noise issues affecting the game, so Maide set out to investigate and found out that the audio emulation codebase was wrongly saving the state of all different audio channels in the same address! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This wasn’t enough to solve the random noise issues affecting the game, so Maide set out to investigate and found out that the audio emulation codebase was incorrectly saving the state of all different audio channels in the same address! 
```

As you can imagine, if the left audio channel stores some samples, the right channel does the same (overwriting what the left channel stored), and then the left channel fetches back something unexpected, the result can sound... interesting.
Users described this problem in Metroid as “if someone shot a gun right by your ears”.

Now each audio channel stores its information in {{< gh-hovercard "9795" "different memory regions," >}} avoiding any issues with overlapping access.
Not only `Metroid Prime Remastered` benefits from this; both `Fire Emblem` games have shown improvements as well.

{{< imgs
	"./fee.png| Clown Swimsuit (Fire Emblem Engage)"
  >}}

Another issue Maide found was a missed check causing an array index to read negative values, which is, in simple terms, “very wrong”.
This was causing the audio engine to grab {{< gh-hovercard "9769" "random chunks of memory" >}} as information for mixing, crashing the audio engine, and yuzu with it.

> Solving this oopsie resolves crashes happening in `Metroid Prime Remastered`, and most likely others too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Solving this oopsie resolves crashes happening while playing `Metroid Prime Remastered`, and most likely others too.
```

## UI changes

The LDN lobby window got some love from newcomer [unfamiliarplace](https://github.com/unfamiliarplace), adding the option to {{< gh-hovercard "9713" "hide empty rooms." >}}
Nothing beats quality of life changes like this, thanks!

{{< imgs
	"./lobby.png| Only the dankest rooms, please"
  >}}

> For Discord gamers, [SoRadGaming](https://github.com/SoRadGaming) gives us proper game images for {{< gh-hovercard "9720" "Discord Status!" >}}
> The images are grabbed from our compatibility wiki, which is under a rewrite, so expect some games to be missing for now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Discord gamers, [SoRadGaming](https://github.com/SoRadGaming) implemented proper game images for your {{< gh-hovercard "9720" "Discord Status!" >}}
The images are grabbed from our compatibility wiki, which is under a rewrite, so expect some games to be missing for now.
```

{{< single-title-imgs
    "Make your friends envy you with this simple trick!"
    "./discord1.png"
    "./discord2.png"
    >}}

A small mistake caused the web applet to lose the ability to redraw and zoom its content when resizing the yuzu web applet window.
{{< gh-hovercard "9761" "Re-adding" >}} the `setZoomFactor` call fixes the scaling, allowing players to fit their Mario Manual to their needs.

Per-game settings are very useful, but also very tricky to get right codewise.
[m-HD](https://github.com/m-HD) greets us by adding a few missing graphical settings to the list, solving conflicting issues when setting the fullscreen mode, resolution scaling, filter, and antialiasing values in the {{< gh-hovercard "9784" "per-game" >}} configuration window.

> German77 then properly implemented per-game configuration support for the `Force maximum clocks` {{< gh-hovercard "9863" "setting" >}} AMD GPUs [benefit](https://yuzu-emu.org/entry/yuzu-progress-report-jan-2023/) so much from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
german77 then properly implemented per-game configuration support for the `Force maximum clocks` {{< gh-hovercard "9863" "setting" >}} AMD GPUs [benefit](https://yuzu-emu.org/entry/yuzu-progress-report-jan-2023/) so much from.
```
Made username lowercase to match the rest of the instances of his username

> While we are constantly working to improve the user experience, yuzu sometimes does crash, that’s expected of any first generation emulator.
> What shouldn’t happen is missing changes made to the configuration after a crash, or a forced close.
> The problem was in our Qt UI, and german77 worked to properly tell Qt to save and sync the configuration to file, avoiding any {{< gh-hovercard "9817" "configuration change loss" >}} after a force close.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While we are constantly working to improve the user experience, yuzu sometimes does crash. That’s expected of any first generation emulator, but what shouldn’t happen is not saving changes made to the configuration settings after a crash or a force close.
The problem was in our Qt UI, and german77 worked to properly tell Qt to save and sync the configuration to file, avoiding any {{< gh-hovercard "9817" "configuration change loss" >}} after a force close.
```

## General fixes

[MonsterDruide1](https://github.com/MonsterDruide1) continues to do wonders with the [LDN](https://yuzu-emu.org/entry/ldn-is-here/) code.
This time, proper error handling.
One of the possible errors when handling TCP connections is `ECONNRESET`, which happens when the other end closes the connection abruptly.

> Oldschool gamers call this “rage quitting”.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Old-school gamers call this “rage quitting”.
```

Jokes aside, when a sudden disconnection like this happens, the error used to get caught by yuzu instead of the game, causing the game to never get the notification of the client disconnection.

> Properly {{< gh-hovercard "9843" "passing the error" >}} through to the game allows it to handle the issue on its own way instead of crashing the yuzu LDN session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Properly {{< gh-hovercard "9843" "passing the error" >}} through to the game allows it to handle the issue its own way instead of crashing the yuzu LDN session.
```

Some improvements were done to yuzu-cmd, the command-line alternative to the default Qt UI.

> german77 added support for {{< gh-hovercard "9729" "touch inputs from mouse clicks and SDL controller input support," >}} and {{< gh-hovercard "9730" "two parameters," >}} `-g`  for specifying a game file location and `-u` for specifying an user profile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
german77 added support for {{< gh-hovercard "9729" "touch inputs from mouse clicks and SDL controller input support," >}} and {{< gh-hovercard "9730" "two parameters:" >}} `-g`  for specifying a game file location and `-u` for specifying a user profile.
```

> Your writer also showed up, {{< gh-hovercard "9737" "updating" >}} the graphical filters and resolution multiplier options that were recently added to regular yuzu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your writer also showed up, {{< gh-hovercard "9737" "updating" >}} the graphical filters and resolution multiplier options that were recently added to the Mainline yuzu.
```

## Hardware section

### NVIDIA driver 531.18, it’s a good one

This latest (at the time of writing) release of the NVIDIA driver, 531.18, includes support for `VK_EXT_extended_dynamic_state3`, a Vulkan extension previous readers will be familiar with.
Having this extension supported means fewer shaders need to be built, resulting in a smoother experience thanks to reduced shader stuttering, and lower RAM use.

We recommend at least Turing and newer (GTX 1600, RTX 2000-4000) users to update, as we expect this release to not fix the issues affecting Pascal and Maxwell hardware (GTX 1000 and older).

### AMD Ryzen 7000X3D series, and the importance of Game Mode

AMD recently released their Zen 4 CPUs with 3D V-Cache technology, and in an effort to copy Intel in weirdness, they decided to release a top of the line asymmetric design with the 7950X3D.

> Only one of this gaming beast CPU’s two CCDs (modules containing 8 cores each) has access to the expanded L3 V-Cache, and the decision on which one to use is up to Windows Game Bar. 
> To our dismay, there is no hardware scheduler here. 
> The chipset driver and a Windows toggle decides which mode is better.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only one of this gaming-beast CPU’s two CCDs (modules containing 8 cores each) has access to the expanded L3 V-Cache, and the decision on which one to use is up to Windows Game Bar. 
To our dismay, there is no hardware scheduler here. 
The chipset driver and a Windows toggle decides which mode is better.
```

Since yuzu and basically any other emulator are not registered as games by Windows, the user will have to manually intervene and enable `Game Mode` in order to let the chipset driver profile performance and decide which CCD will provide the best performance.

Doing this should also benefit every user, not just 7000X3D ones, as Windows uses the toggle to allocate resources (RAM, threads) to the affected program, so it’s not a bad practice at all!
 
Here are the steps:

> With yuzu or any other emulator/program of choice open, press `Windows + G` and go to the Settings cogwheel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With yuzu or any other emulator/program of choice open, press `Windows + G`, and go to the Settings cogwheel.
```

{{< imgs
	"./xbox1.png| Bet you didn’t know about this extra bloat in Windows"
  >}}

Then enable `Remember this is a game`.

{{< single-title-imgs-compare
	"And just like that, better performance!"
	"./xbox2.png"
	"./xbox3.png"
>}}

That’s it! 

Now Windows will allocate resources in a smarter way, and Ryzen 7000X3D users will get the best performance out of their shiny new CPU. 
Testing also shows that this helps improve performance with proper P-Cores and E-Cores allocation on current Intel CPUs too.

> For older Ryzen users, the latest chipset update that enables the performance profiling for the 3D Zen4 products reportedly also improves performance slightly for any other older CPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For older Ryzen users, the latest chipset update that enables the performance profiling for the 3D Zen4 products reportedly also improves performance slightly.
```

Who can say no to free performance after two clicks, right?

### Intel, please fix your Vulkan support

We’re waiting for Intel to fix their SPIR-V compiler crashes on the Windows drivers. 

> In its current status, any game can crash at any moment if you use Vulkan, and unlike AMD who solved most of their OpenGL issues with a rewrite, Intel doesn’t get a fallback option with the old graphics API, which in its current status only renders almost everything in black.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In its current state, any game can crash at any moment if you use Vulkan, and unlike AMD who solved most of their OpenGL issues with a rewrite, Intel doesn’t get a fallback option with the old graphics API, which in its current state renders almost everything in black.
```

{{< imgs
	"./intel.png| This crash can happen at any moment"
  >}}

Frustratingly, this isn’t a problem with the Mesa Linux drivers, or the old Gen9/9.5/11 iGPUs and its discontinued Windows drivers, so it’s a proper critical regression affecting the new driver branch that will have to wait until AAA native PC games are running well enough to give the developers time to focus on the “less important stuff”, like professional programs, and console emulators.

## Future projects

I’ve been kidnapped by our devs, so no leaks this time. I promise more for next month!

> There is one thing I’m allowed to mention, recent core timing changes have reduced CPU use by a 5-20% across the board on Windows depending on the total thread count, this means better performance and reduced power consumption, especially benefiting mobile devices like laptops and handhelds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is one thing I’m allowed to mention, recent core timing changes have reduced CPU use by 5-20% across the board on Windows depending on the total thread count. This means better performance and reduced power consumption, especially benefiting mobile devices like laptops and handhelds.
```

> This change is already in both Mainline and Early Access, but we’ll talk more about it and other nice stuff next month.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change is already in both [Mainline](https://yuzu-emu.org/downloads/) and [Early Access](https://yuzu-emu.org/help/early-access/), but we’ll talk more about it and other nice things next month.
```

That’s all folks!

> Thank you Alicia for the good laughs censoring that pic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
